.TH scoutfs-fenced 8
.SH NAME
scoutfs-fenced \- scoutfs fence request monitoring and dispatch daemon
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B scoutfs-fenced
daemon runs on hosts with mounts that are configured as quorum members
and could create fence requests.  It watches sysfs directories of
mounted scoutfs volumes for the directories store requests
to fence a mount.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
scoutfs-fenced reads the
.I SCOUTFS_FENCED_CONFIG_FILE
environment variable for the path to the config file that contains its
configuration.  The file must be readable and is sourced as a bash
script and is expected to set the following configuration variables.

.SH CONFIGURATION

.TP
.B SCOUTFS_FENCED_DELAY
The number of seconds to wait beteween checking for fence request
directories in the sysfs directories of all mounts on the host.

.TP
.B SCOUTFS_FENCED_RUN
The path to the command to execute for each fence request.  The file at
the path must be executable.

.TP
.B SCOUTFS_FENCED_RUN_ARGS
The arguments that are unconditionally passed through to the run
command.

.SH DAEMONIZING AND LOGGING

scoutfs-fenced runs in the foreground and writes to stderr and stdout.
Disconnecting it from parents and redirecting its output are the
responsibility of the host environment.

.SH RUN COMMAND INTERFACE

scoutfs-fenced sets enviroment variables for the run command with
information about the mount that must be fenced:

.TP
.B SCOUTFS_FENCED_REQ_RID
The RID of the mount to be fenced.
.TP
.B SCOUTFS_FENCED_REQ_IP
The dotted quad IPv4 address of the last connection from the mount.

.RE
The return status of the run command indicates if the mount was
fenced, or not.  If the mount was successfully fenced then the command
should return a 0 success status.  If the run command returns a non-zero
failure status then the request will be set as errored and the server
will shut down.  The next server that starts will create another fence
request for the mount.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR scoutfs (5),

.SH AUTHORS
Zach Brown <zab@versity.com>
